[dv] Add UNR in DV methodology (#4091)
lowRISC/opentitan: doc/ug/dv_methodology/index.md

*  Collect all coverage metrics (except toggle based on above bullet) on the DUT and all of its non-pre-verified sub-modules
*  Treat pre-verified sub-modules as ['black-box'](#integration-testing) in terms of coverage collection

### Unreachable Coverage Analysis

Instead of manually reviewing coverage reports to find unreachable code, we use VCS UNR to generate a UNR exclusion file which lists all the unreachable codes.
VCS UNR (Unreachability) is a formal solution that determines the unreachable coverage objects automatically from simulation.

> The coverage config file ([cover.cfg](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/cover.cfg)) used with `-cm_hier` in simulation will be used as UNR input to cater our [Coverage Collection Guidelines](#Coverage Collection Guidelines), and common exclusion file ([common_cov_excl.el](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/common_cov_excl.el)) can be also supplied to UNR to avoid generating reviewed common unreachable coverage.

Reviewer: We already talk about 'coverage hierarchy file' in the previous section. You can just say `The same coverage hierarchy file and the exclusion files used for the simulation (which limits the coverage collection to exactly what is needed at compile-time) can be supplied to VCS UNR.'

Follow these steps to run and submit the exclusion file.

> 1. Generate a VCS coverage database for the block by using `--cov` option in regression tools-dvsim.py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate the VCS coverage database for the block by running full regression with `--cov` switch 
```

> 2. Use following command to run VCS UNR to generate exclusion file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Launch the VCS UNR flow:
```

   When the unreachable code is sensible and we decide to exclude it in coverage report, create a PR to add to ['common_cov_excl.el'](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/common_cov_excl.el) or block specific exclusion file, such as ['uart_cov_excl.el'](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/ip/uart/dv/cov/uart_cov_excl.el)

Here are some guidelines for using UNR and checking in generating exclusion.
1. It's encouraged that designers run UNR to check the design in the early design stage (D1/D2), but adding exclusion for unreachable coverage should be done between D3 and V3 stage when the design is frozen (no feature update is allowed, except bug fix).
It is not the right thing to add a coverage exclusion file to reach the 80% needed for V2.
2. If any RTL changes happen to the design after the coverage exclusion file has been created, it needs to be redone and re-reviewed.
3. All coverage exclusion files and coverage configuration file (if it's not using default [cover.cfg](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/cover.cfg)) should be checked during sign-off.

> 4. Keep the VCS generated `CHECKSUM` along with exclusions, which is served as a crosscheck to ensure that the exclusion isn't applied when there is some change on the corresponding codes and the exclusion is outdated.

Reviewer: This means we'd have to forego the `--exclude-bypass-checks` switch.

Author: We don't use this switch except xbar. Xbar has a very few auto-generated exclusions, which we can review it during signoff.

Reviewer: True, but worth mentioning this.

> 5. For IP verified in IP-level test bench, UNR should be run in IP-level to generate exclusion. For IP verified in top-level, UNR should be run in top-level.

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

*  Collect all coverage metrics (except toggle based on above bullet) on the DUT and all of its non-pre-verified sub-modules
*  Treat pre-verified sub-modules as ['black-box'](#integration-testing) in terms of coverage collection

### Unreachable Coverage Analysis

Instead of manually reviewing coverage reports to find unreachable code, we use VCS UNR to generate a UNR exclusion file which lists all the unreachable codes.

> VCS UNR (Unreachability) is a formal solution that determines the unreachable coverage objects automatically from simulation.

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to include a link to VCS UNR page? (if they have one)

Author: I google "VCS UNR" but didn't find any official related page. I think it's only available in VCS user guide which isn't released to public.

The same coverage hierarchy file and the exclusion files used for the simulation can be supplied to VCS UNR.

Follow these steps to run and submit the exclusion file.
1. Generate the VCS coverage database for the block by running full regression with `--cov` switch.
2. Launch the VCS UNR flow:
```
util/dvsim/dvsim.py path/to/<dut>_sim_cfg.hjson --cov-unr
```
3. If no exclusion file is generated, there is no unreachable code in RTL.
   If there is an exclusion file generated, the output should be reviewed by both designer and verification engineer.
   When the unreachable code is sensible and we decide to exclude it in coverage report, create a PR to add to ['common_cov_excl.el'](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/common_cov_excl.el) or block specific exclusion file, such as ['uart_cov_excl.el'](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/ip/uart/dv/cov/uart_cov_excl.el)

Here are some guidelines for using UNR and checking in generating exclusion.

> 1. It's encouraged that designers run UNR to check the design in the early design stage (D1/D2), but adding exclusion for unreachable coverage should be done between D2 and V3 stage when the design is frozen (no feature update is allowed, except bug fix).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. It's encouraged that designers run UNR to check the design in the early design stage (D1/D2), but adding an exclusion for unreachable coverage should be done between the D2 and V3 stage when the design is frozen (no feature update is allowed, except bug fix).
```

Author: Done

Getting to 90% coverage via functional test is easy.
Over 90% is the hard part as there may be a big chunk of unreachable codes.

> It is hard to go through coverage report to manually add exclusions, but VCS UNR flow provides a path to weed out all of unreachables ones

Reviewer 4: Nit: missing full stop.

Author: Fixed. Thanks

> It is hard to go through coverage report to manually add exclusions, but VCS UNR flow provides a path to weed out all of unreachables ones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is cumbersome to go through a coverage report to manually add exclusions, but the VCS UNR flow provides a path to weed out all of the unreachables ones.
```

Author: Updated. Thanks

However, it is not the right thing to add a coverage exclusion file to reach the 80% needed for V2 since the design isn't stable at that period.
2. If any RTL changes happen to the design after the coverage exclusion file has been created, it needs to be redone and re-reviewed.
3. All coverage exclusion files and coverage configuration file (if it's not using default [cover.cfg](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/blob/master/hw/dv/tools/vcs/cover.cfg)) should be checked during sign-off.
4. Keep the VCS generated `CHECKSUM` along with exclusions, which is served as a crosscheck to ensure that the exclusion isn't applied when there is some change on the corresponding codes and the exclusion is outdated.
We should not use `--exclude-bypass-checks` to disable the check, otherwise, it's needed to have additional review to make sure exclusions match to the design.
5. For IP verified in IP-level test bench, UNR should be run in IP-level to generate exclusion.
For IP verified in top-level, UNR should be run in top-level.
There is no reuse of exclusions from IP to top, since they are independently closed for coverage.

> Note: VCS UNR doesn't support assertion or functional coverage.

Reviewer 3: @weicaiyang I think this needs rewording.
it is not so much a lack of support. it simply does not make sense to talk about unreachable code when talking functional coverage.

```suggestion
Note: VCS UNR is only relevant when closing code coverage.
```

Author: I feel unreachable analysis is doable for assertion. FPV tool already can support it, but it's supported in VCS.
UNR for covergroup may be possible too in the future. I kind of prefer to explicitly mention what UNR can't support. WDYT?

Reviewer 3: I think we are getting into semantics here.
unreachable functional coverage is to me a coverage hole

Author: Agree. usually it's just due to coding issue in TB, like forget to call the sample or assign to a wrong variable. I feel tool could help to sort that out.
